---
layout: post
title:  "Hello World"
date:   2016-11-15
categories: misc
---

I created this site back in August with the purpose of improving my writing
skills, showcasing my technical knowledge and sharing my opinion on some issues
in life. However, writing stuff is not as easy as it seems. Especially for
someone like me who never learnt English properly. Three months after I
published this site, here comes my first blog article. Big procrastinator
confirmed. But anyway, you have to start from somewhere right?

For the remaining part of this article, I want to briefly discuss one of the
major reasons that I started this blog and picked up my reading habit.

I wouldn't criticize the Canadian education system but it is true that Canadian
engineering students do not take enough complementary studies electives. Our
society awards those who are creative and able to bring revolutionary changes.
Specialized engineers who do not diverse themselves are always specialized
engineers. No one wants to be *just an engineer*.

I talked to a very prominent hacker in the hackathon community at HackPrinceton
a few days ago.  He is the type of person who wins every hackathon he
participates in. Not long ago, he is invited to cast a well-known `maker's show`
in San Francisco. I was told that he is pursuing a double major degree but never
expected that neither of his two majors are computer science related. When
looking at a problem, his knowledge in the two fields he majors in gives him a
different perspective than the computer science majors. It allows him to come
out with the most creative and effective solutions.

Especially for engineering students, it is important to broaden your knowledge.
It is ridiculous that Throughout my [8 study
terms](https://ugradcalendar.uwaterloo.ca/page/ENG-Software-Engineering), there
are only three slots for linkage electives and two for science electives.

One of the goals of this blog is to compensate the lack of electives in my
program. I will try to pick up my reading habit and use this website to share my
thoughts on the books I am reading and some personal experience.
